--- PAGE 1 ---
Hypersonic Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator (HIAD) 
Technology Development Overview 
Stephen J. Hughes1, Dr. F. McNeil Cheatwood2, Dr. Anthony M. Calomino3, Henry S. Wright4, 
Mary Elizabeth Wusk5, and Monica F. Hughes6 
NASA Langley Research Center 
Email: Stephen.J.Hughes@nasa.gov, F.M.Cheatwood@nasa.gov, Herny.S.Wright@nasa.gov, 
Anthony.M.Calomino@nasa.gov, Mary.E.Wusk@nasa.gov , Monica.F.Hughes @nasa.gov 
 
The successful flight of the Inflatable Reentry Vehicle Experi ment (IRVE)-3 has further 
demonstrated the potential value of Hyperso nic Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator (HIAD) 
technology.  This technology develo pment effort is  funded by NASA’s Space Technology 
Mission Directorate (STMD) Game Changing Development Program (GCDP).  This paper 
provides an overview of a multi-year HIAD technology development effort, detailing the 
projects completed to date and the additional testing planned for the future. 
The effort was divided into t hree areas: Flexible System s Development (FSD), Mission 
Advanced Entry Concepts (AEC), and Flight Validation.  FSD consists of a Flexible Thermal 
Protection Systems (FTPS) element, which is  investigating high temperature materials, 
coatings, and additives for us e in the bladder, insulator, an d heat shield layers; and an 
Inflatable Structures (IS) element which includes manufacture and testing (laboratory and 
wind tunnel) of inflatable struct ures and their associate d structural elements.  AEC consists 
of the Mission Applications element developing concepts (including payload interfaces) for 
missions at multiple destination s for the purpose of demons trating the benefits and need for 
the HIAD technology as well as the Next Generation Subsystems element. 
Ground test development has been pursued in pa rallel with the Flight Validation IRVE-3 
flight test.  A larger scale (6m diame ter) HIAD inflatable structure was constructed and 
aerodynamically tested in the National Full -scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC) 40ft by 
80ft test section along with a du plicate of the IRVE-3 3m article.  Both the 6m and 3m 
articles were tested with instrumented aerodyna mic covers which incorporated an array of 
pressure taps to capture surface pressure distrib ution to validate Computational Fluid 
Dynamics (CFD) model predictions of surface pressure distribution.  The 3m article also had 
a duplicate IRVE-3 Thermal Prot ection System (TPS) to test in addition to testing with the 
Aerocover configuration.  Both the Aerocover s and the TPS were populated with high 
contrast targets so that phot ogrammetric solutions of the loa ded surface could be created.  
These solutions both refined the aerodyna mic shape for CFD modeling and provided a 
deformed shape to validate structural Finite Element Analysis (FEA) models. 
Extensive aerothermal testing has been perfor med on the TPS candidates.  This testing 
has been conducted in several facilit ies across the country.  The majority of the testing has 
been conducted in the Boeing Large Core Arc Tunnel (LCAT).  HIAD is continuing to 
mature testing methodology in this facility and is developing new test sample fixtures and 
control methodologies to improve understanding and quality of the environments to which 
the samples are subjected.  Additional t esting has been and continues to be performed in the 
                                                      
1 HIAD Chief Engineer, Systems Engineering Directorate (SED)/Mechanical Systems Branch, NASA LaRC/MS432 
2 EDL Principle Investigator, Office of Chief Technologist, NASA LaRC/MS250 
3  HIAD Associate Principle Investigator, Flexible Sy stems Development, SED/Atmospheric Flight and Entry 
Systems Branch, NASA LaRC/MS489 
4 HIAD Deputy PI, SED/ Atmospheric Flight and Entry Systems Branch, NASA LaRC/MS489 
5 HIAD Project Manager,  Space Technology and Exploration Directorate (STED), NASA LaRC/MS494 
6 HIAD Manager, Flexible System Development,  STED, NASA LaRC/MS489 
--- PAGE 2 ---
NASA LaRC 8ft High Temperature Tu nnel, where samples up to 2ft by 2ft are being tested 
over representative underlying structures incorporat ing construction features such as sewn 
seams and through-thickness quilting. 
With the successful completion to the IRVE -3 flight demonstration, mission planning 
efforts are ramping up on the development  of the HIAD Earth Atmospheric Reenty Test 
(HEART) which will demonstrate a relevant sc ale vehicle in relevant environments via a 
large-scale aeroshell (~8.5m) entering at orbital  velocity (~7km/sec) with an entry mass on 
the order of 4MT. Also, the Build to Print (B TP) hardware built as a risk mitigation for the 
IRVE-3 project to have a “spare” ready to go in the event of a launch vehicle delivery failure 
is now available for an additional sub-orbit al flight experiment. Mission planning is 
underway to define a mission that can utilize th is existing hardware and help the HIAD 
project further mature this technology. 
 
Nomenclature 
8ft HTT = NASA LaRC 8 Foot High Temperature Tunnel 
°C = centigrade 
ACS = Attitude Control System 
AEC = Advanced Entry Concepts 
AoA = Angle of Attack 
BET = Best Estimated Trajectory 
BBXI = Black Brant XI 
cg = center of gravity 
CFD = Computational Fluid Dynamics 
FEA = Finite Element Analysis 
FSD = Flexible Systems Development 
FTPS = Flexible Thermal Protection System 
HEART = HIAD Earth Atmospheric Reentry Test 
HIAD = Hypersonic Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator 
IAD = Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator 
IRVE = Inflatable Reentry Vehicle Experiment 
IS = Inflatable Structures 
LCAT = Boeing Large Core Arc Tunnel 
LEO = Low Earth Orbit 
m = meter 
MCR = Mission Concept Review 
MEDLI = Mars Science Laboratory Entry/Descent/Landing Instrumentation 
MPCV = Multi-Purpose Crew Module 
MT = Metric ton 
NFAC = National Full-scale Aerodynamics Complex 
NIACS = NSROC Inertial Attitude Control System 
NSROC = NASA Sounding Rocket Operations Contract 
OCT = Office of Chief Technologist 
PBM = Physics Based Model 
PCM = Pressurized Cargo Module 
SiC = Silicon Carbide 
SRI = Southern Research Institute 
TPS = Thermal Protection System 
UPWT = Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel 
WFF = Wallops Flight Facility 
 
--- PAGE 3 ---
I. Introduction 
The successful flight of the Inflatable Reentry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE)-3 (reference 1) has further 
demonstrated the potential value of Hypersonic Inflatab le Aerodynamic Decelerator (HIAD) technology.  
This technology development effort is funded by NASA’s Space Technology Mission Directorate 
(STMD) Game Changing Development Program (GCD P).  The HIAD technology development was 
divided into three areas: Flexible Systems Devel opment (FSD), Advanced Entry Concepts, and Flight 
Validation (see figure 1).  This paper prov ides an overview of a multi-year HIAD technology 
development effort, both the projects completed to date and the additional testing planned for the future. 
 
Figure 1HIAD Project Organizational Structure 
II. HIAD Project 
As stated earlier HIAD was divided into three areas: Flexible Systems Development (FSD), 
Advanced Entry Concepts (AEC), and Flight Validati on.  FSD was divided into two elements a Flexible 
Thermal Protection System (FTPS) el ement and an Inflatable Structures (IS) element.  The FTPS effort 
focuses on manufacturing processes for TPS materials and assemblies, material thermal response 
properties over the range of environments in which the materials have to operate, incorporating those 
material properties into a physics based model to pr edict the thermal response to the applied aerothermal 
heating environment, Computational Fluid Dynamic s (CFD) simulation to determine the correct 
environment to apply in aerothermal heating facilities to replicate the design flight environment, and 
finally aerothermal performance testing to subject instrumented materials to the environments proving 
capabilities of the materials and providing data to verify the physics based response models.  The IS effort 
focuses on manufacturing processes for IS materi als and assemblies, material structural response 
properties over the range of environments in which the materials have to operate, incorporating those 
material properties into a Finite Element Analysis (FEA) to predict the load and deflection response to the 
applied environment, Computational Fluid Dynamic s (CFD) simulation to determine the correct 
environment to apply to the structure to simulate the design flight environment, and finally performance 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
testing to subject instrumented in flatable structures to the envir onments proving capabilities of the 
materials and providing data to veri fy the FEA.  The AEC effort is divided into the Mission Application 
Trade Studies and Next Generation Subsytems.  Mission Apps is developing concepts (including payload 
interfaces) for missions at multiple destinations for the purpose of demonstrating the benefits and need for 
the HIAD technology.  Next Gen is investigating methods for generating lift on blunted cones focusing on 
aerodynamic trim surfaces.  Flight Validation efforts up until this point had been focused on the IRVE-3 
flight and the associated data reduction.  A flight sp are unit of the IRVE-3 centerbody hardware, referred 
to as Build to Print (BTP), was built as a risk redu ction to have hardware available in the event of an 
IRVE-3 launch vehicle failure.  This unit is now avai lable for a new mission and is being proposed as a 
new start mission to OCT, IRVE-4.  Additional flight  validation work has been performed in support of 
the HIAD Earth Atmospheric Reentry Test (HEART ) a proposed HIAD which leverages the Orbital 
Sciences Cygnus Pressurized Cargo Module (PCM) as ballast as part of an entry demonstration flight test, 
resulting in achieving a TRL7 for HIAD entry technologies.  
III. FSD - FTPS 
FTPS development
1 has progressed significantly in the two years since the last ADS conference.  
Thermal and structural property tests have been perfor med for many candidate materials over a range of 
temperatures and pressures at both Southern Research Institute (SRI) and in-house test facilities at NASA 
LaRC and GRC.  TPS layups have been mechanically aged at SRI to determine if there is any problematic 
degradation in material response properties af ter being hard packed, environmentally cycled and 
deployed.  Aerothermal tests have been performed on va rious candidate layups in many configurations.  
Testing has been performed on large 2ft by 2ft sample s in the 8ft High Temperature Tunnel, a vitiated 
flow blow down facility at NASA LaRC, but the Bo eing Large Core Arc Tunnel (LCAT) has become the 
workhorse aerothermal test facility for the HIAD project. A custom designed shear wedge fixture (See 
Figure 2) was developed and used for many material ca ndidate layups at a range of test conditions.  
Difficulties getting the HIAD physics based thermal performance model predictions to match tested layup 
temperatures caused the project to re-evaluate the te st approach.  As a result, a decision was made to 
change to stagnation testing to help achieve model  correlation by reducing the number of environment 
variables.  A stagnation test fixtur e (see Figure 3) was designed based on the outer mold line of a test 
fixture extensively used at LCAT by the Mars Science Laboratory Entry/Descent/Landing 
Instrumentation (MEDLI) project. Stagnation testin g revealed an issue with the heat flux distribution 
across the test sample surface in the new stagnation model holder.  The outer sample plies were melting at 
the perimeter at fluxes previously survived in the s hear fixture and laser heating tests. CFD modeling of 
the test setup indicated there was roughly a 25% rise in heat flux from the center of the sample to the 
sample perimeter in the current stagnation configu ration.  Working with the LCAT personnel the 
stagnation sample holder was redesigned (see Figure 4) and heat flux variation across the face of the 
sample was cut to approximately 10%.  Additional ly LCAT personnel, Matt Kardell and John Simms, 
developed the control to run heating profiles in the LCAT to match pr eliminary HEART design 
simulation trajectory heating profiles (see Figure 5).  This capability was a significant improvement over 
the traditional square pulse heating approach because the FTPS materials respond much more favorably to 
realistic profile heating than to a square pulse.  As  a result of these two improvements, materials that 
would have been classified as incapable of sustaining a 40W/cm 2 heat rate survive heating profiles with 
peak heating in excess of 50W/cm 2.  Finally, aerothermal testing of the full scale IRVE-3 nose assembly 
was performed in the JSC Test Position 2 arc jet (see  Figure 6). Two build to print copies of the flight 
--- PAGE 5 ---
nose TPS assembly were tested at heating rates far in  excess of the IRVE-3 predicted peak flight heating 
rate as well as heat load. To address scalability conce rns an FTPS was designed with the current baseline 
materials to be integrated with a 6m stacked torus in flatable structure and is currently under construction. 
An FTPS physics based thermal response model has been under development in corporating the material 
thermal properties as they are acquired in testing.   Sufficient thermo-physical phenomena and property 
data are now incorporated in the model to demonst rate reasonable agreement between model ply 
temperature predictions and aerothermal testing data for the baseline FTPS layup. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 LCAT Redesigned 4.5in Stagnation Fixture 
 
Figure 2 LCAT Shear Fixture 
Figure 3 LCAT 3.5in Stagnation Fixture 
--- PAGE 6 ---
 
 
Future FTPS development will include aerothermal testing of the sample layups mechanically aged at 
SRI.  Development will also continue on next gener ation materials.  The most pressing material 
development is with the outer cloth.  The latest trajectory simulation and CFD modeling of the HEART 
design mission are indicating the aerothermal heating environment may be in exces s of what the baseline 
outer material, BF20, is capable of surviving.  The replacement candidate, SiC, is an excellent 
aerothermal performer, but needs to in crease technical maturity in the areas of manufacturing the base 
cloth, construction (stitching and joining) of the FT PS assembly, and mechanical durability to withstand 
the rigors of construction, packing, and deployment.  Additionally, a sub scale 3m assembly of the next 
generation FTPS is planned for FY2014. 
 
LCAT Run 2530 - 27 February 2013
Arc Parameters
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100
Time (sec.)
Heat Flux (W/cm^2)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Stagnation Pressure (kPa), Integrated Heat Load 
(kJ/cm^2) & Volts
q-stag q-stag target P-stag P-stag target
P&H Driver Volts Proportion Air Volts Badger Valve Volts Integrated Heat Load
11.74 kJ/cm^2
 
Figure 5 LCAT Profile Heat and Pressure Pulse 
Figure 6 IRVE-3 Nose Assembly in JSC TP2 
--- PAGE 7 ---
IV. FSD - IS 
 
Figure 7 NFAC 40x80 Test Section with 6m HAID Test Article 
The IS technical development has progressed as well  in the two years since the last ADS conference.  
Uni-axial load testing at temperatur e has been conducted on all candidate materials and several potential 
next generation materials.  3m and 6m diamet er IS assemblies have been manufactured and 
aerodynamically tested in the 40ftx80ft circuit of the National Fullscale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC) 
at Ames Research Center (see Figure 7) 2.  Instrumentation has been dev eloped to measure loads in the 
strap assemblies3 and a photogrammetric measurement system has been adapted for use with these high-
drag blunt bodies in the NFAC 40x80 test section 4.  Extensive effort has been expended to reduce and 
post-process the photogrammetric data 5 so that these data can be utilized to create deformed model 
geometry for CFD grid generation and for comparison to FEA predicted displacements.  Data from the 
strap load cells have been used to help refine the structural model.  The challenges of modeling the 
complexities of a stacked torus assembly have lead the project to take a step back and perform simple 
elemental testing in an effort to assure that the HIAD  FEA can predict simpler single element tests.  A 
series of straight air-beams with three different bias  braid angles were manufactured in order to study the 
effect of braid angle on structural response as well as demonstrating that the project can verify that the 
FEA is accurately modeling the behavior of the constitutive elements.  The straight beams will be used in 
4-point bending and tension torsion testing.  Additi onally, several individual tori are being manufactured 
at three different major diameters with the same bias braid angle and axial cord strength to try and capture 
any effects of scaling. For one of the major diameters an additional test article is being constructed with a 
different bias braid angle and another test article is being constructed with lighter weight axial cord.  The 
individual tori will be subjected to a radially inward (compressive) load and a combination of inward load 
and torsion.  Again the effort is to verify the FEA ac curately predicts the behavior of the element.  New 
instrumentation is being developed for the elemental test ing to make it possible to measure the strain in 
the axial cords during load testing.  This instrumentation will allow the project to verify hypotheses about 

--- PAGE 8 ---
how the level of axial cord load affe cts the structural response of the torus.  The instrumentation being 
developed is elastomeric and has the possibility of being tolerant of packing and deployment, potentially 
making the instrumentation applicable for in-flight measurement. 
 
 
Figure 9 Preliminary Design Elemental Test Article Toroid Compression/Torsion Fixture 
IS has also continued to advance the temperature capability of the inflatable structure in an effort to 
reduce overall aeroshell system mass by reducing the quantity of TPS insulation required. The effort 
requires both a higher temperature capable fiber fo r the construction of the bias braid, axial cord, and 
suspension webbing as well as a hig her temperature film for the inflatable bladder liner.  IS has two 
leading fiber candidates, graphite and PBO.  Load test s at temperature have bee n completed for identical 
construction webbing from the two candidate material s.  The PBO webbing has roughly 70% reduction 
strength at 400C, but even with that reduction is more than adequate to carry the required loads.  The 
graphite only experiences roughly a 20% reduction in load, but is below the required load capacity.  
Discussions are underway with the nar row goods weaver to attempt to improve the initial strength of the 
 
 
Figure 8 Elemental Straight Beam Hydrostatic Test Article 
--- PAGE 9 ---
graphite webbing to take advantage of the higher temperature capability of the fiber.  The leading bladder 
liner candidate is an elastic polyimide film, Essar St retch.  The manufacturer reports use temperatures in 
excess of 400C and allowable elongation over 80%.  High temperature testing of the Essar Stretch is 
currently underway at NASA LaRC in t he structures lab.  Tori with gr aphite axial cords and bias braid 
have been constructed (see Figure 10) to investig ate the effects of packing and deployment on the 
graphite fiber, and these packing and deployment trials are in progress in the NASA LaRC structures lab.  
Currently, two more articles of the same shape and size are planned to be constructed: one with a PBO 
fiber construction and an elastomeric polyimide liner ; and another with a graphi te fiber construction and 
the same elastomeric polyimide liner. 
 
Manufacturing process control is also being invest igated by the IS project.  The previous 6m and 3m 
NFAC test articles exhibited variation in load in straps that should have been identical during 
axisymmetric load testing.  Manufacturing toleranc es have a significant effect on strap preload.  
Procedures have been developed in an effort to reduce  manufacturing variation. Those procedures are 
being applied to the construction of a new 6m inflatable structure that will be tested in an upcoming test 
series at NFAC 40x80.  A larger portion of the model will be instrumented with the custom strap tension 
gauges and load pins during load testing to increase the sample set in an attempt to assure the load data 
being used for FEA model validation are a true repres entation of the strap loading and not statistical 
outliers.  Strap load instrumentation is being incorp orated in the manufacturing process as part of the 
attempt to improve process control and produce a more uniformly loaded assembly.  
Another NFAC 40x80 test series is planned fiscal year  14.  Plans for this series includes testing the 
new 6m structure with the accompanying FTPS manufac tured from current baseline materials. Lessons 
learned from the previous NFAC test series will be incorporated into this new test series.  Possible 
reconfiguration of the model support could reduce the model support flow in teraction that created 
undesirable flow disturbances in the last test series .  Addition instrumentation will provide better model 
coverage to help with FEA deflection and load prediction correlation. 
V. Mission Application Trade Studies 
HIAD Mission Application Trade Studies were conducted in the past year to determine which 
applications are suitable for incorporating a HIAD 6,7.  Hybrid Lunar Return evaluated the use of a HIAD 
in returning Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (MPCV) from a lunar mission via direct Earth entry. The term 
 
Figure 10 Graphite Bias Braid and Axial Cord High Temperature Torus 
--- PAGE 10 ---
hybrid is applied because the HIAD is not the primary heat shield, but rather used to augment the existing 
MPCV heat shield. Hybrid Mars Return evaluated a HIAD for returning MPCV from a Mars mission via 
direct Earth entry.  Launch Asset Recovery evaluated employing a HIAD to recover launch vehicle assets. 
This particular study focused on 1st and 2nd stage re covery of a Falcon-9 launc h vehicle. L2 Lagrange 
Point to Low Earth Orbit (LEO) Tr ansfer evaluated a HIAD for tr ansferring an MPCV from an L2 
condition to a LEO orbit through aerocapture.  Mars  Fast Transit was the evaluation of a HIAD in the 
transfer of MPCV to low or high Earth orbits in a M ars fast transit scenario.  Mars Aerocapture evaluated 
a HIAD performing aerocapture at Mars.  Finally, Mars Southern Highlands was the evaluation of a 
HIAD for performing direct-entry at Mars with access to higher altitudes such as those associated with the 
Mars Southern Highlands region.  Year 2 of HIAD  Mission Applications is focusing on exploring 
additional mission classes, as well as verifying key Year 1 findings through more detailed design and 
analysis of specific reference missions.   
VI. AEC – Next Generation Subsystem 
Next Gen has been concentrating on alternative lift ef fectors in particular Trim Tabs.  In 2001Mars 
Smart Lander (MSL) obtained data for limited number of  trim tab shapes in Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel 
(UPWT).  In April of 2012 Next Gen expanded the supersonic aerodynamic trim tab database with a new 
UPWT wind tunnel test series for a parametric blunt body model with trim tabs (see Figure 11). 
 
VII. IRVE-3 
IRVE-3 launched from the Wallops Flight Facility July 23rd, 2012 (see Figure 12). The vehicle had a 
successful flight delivered to the proper trajectory completing all deployments and performing well from 
entry through all flight regimes.  The mission succe ssfully demonstrated use of a radial cg offset to 
generate a lift vector while employing a flexible inflatable aeroshell.  A NSROC Inertial Attitude Control 
System (NIACS) was successful in controlling roll angle while the vehicle was endo-atmospheric 9. After 
the flight a series of “bonus Maneuvers” were successfully executed to study transient response of vehicle 
trim angle of attack to a shifting cg location.  Flig ht vehicle data captured ex o-atmospheric after the cg 
offset shift was used to calculate the aeroshell/ce nterbody interface stiffness in the free-free condition 
 
Figure 11Trim Tab Models in UPWT 
--- PAGE 11 ---
with no applied aerodynamic load and demonstrated the ground technique employed for pre-flight 
prediction produced an accurate value.  An atmosphe ric anomaly, a ~10% low density strata, excited the 
structure as the vehicle was nearing peak pressure making it possible to calculate the aeroshell/centerbody 
interface stiffness in the free-free condition with a sign ificant applied aerodynamic load (see Figure 13).  
Video data were used to analyze the global aeroshell deflection through the vehicle deceleration pulse and 
this deflection data were used to improve the accuracy of the structural model to predict the deformed 
state during entry. On-board GPS and IMU data were used to refine the best estimated trajectory for the 
for the IRVE-3 flight.  Using the Best Estimated Tra jectory (BET), CFD was performed at key points in 
the trajectory.  Flux and pressure measurements appea r to be in reasonable agreement with the CFD 
calculated values from the BET, however therm ocouple measurements did not agree with temperatures 
calculated using the HIAD physics based model.  An extensive effort
10 was expended to determine the 
reasons behind the disagreement between the model and flight measurements. 
 
 
Figure 12 IRVE-3 Launch 
--- PAGE 12 ---
 
 
VIII. BTP/IRVE-4 
A flight spare unit of the IRVE-3 centerbody hardware, referred to as Build to Print (BTP), was built 
as a risk reduction to have hardwar e available in the event of a an IR VE-3 launch vehicle failure.  With 
the successful flight of IRVE-3 the BTP unit is now  available and is proposed to be used on a new start 
IRVE-4 mission to OCT.  IRVE-3 flight therm ocouple data exhibited significantly lower temperatures 
than were predicted using the environment calculat ed with the as flown BET and the HIAD developed 
physics based model.  With significant effort, both modelling and aerothermal testing, a plausible 
explanation for the anomalous readings has been developed, but another flight data set, particularly for a 
flight with relatively close to the same peak hea ting rate but a significantly longer pulse, would 
demonstrate the hypothesis and remove uncertainty.  WFF is currently in the process of acquiring 3 
Castor IVB motors in an effort to increase the payload capacity of their sounding rocket suite.  The Castor 
IVB has previously been utilized by the Swedish Space Corporation from 1991 through 2006 for the 
Maxus series of 7 microgravity sub orbital launches.  The Maxus configuration (see Figure 15) consisted 
of a 22” payload shroud atop the Castor IVB, so the BTP hardware could l aunch with no outer mold line 
change. Preliminary simulation indicates using Cast or IVB the BTP hardware could achieve a peak 
heating rate similar to IRVE-3 but with roughly twice the IRVE-3 duration (see Figure 14).   
 
Figure 14 IRVE-4 Preliminary Estimation of Environments Achievable in Castor IVB 
 
Data IRVE-3 800 lb 1000 lb
3  m4  m5  m3  m4  m5  m
30° Entry
Max Heat Rate (W/cm2) 13.8 14.7 12.1 12.1 13.7 11.2 9.9
Heat Pulse (s) - Time to 0.1 W/cm2 35 59 54 54 59 54 52
Total Heat Load (J/cm2) 188 326 258 258 310 245 210
Max Deceleration (g) 19.7 12.7 12.7 12.7 12.2 12.2 12.3
40° Entry
Max Heat Rate (W/cm2) 13.8 17.5 14.3 12.6 16.5 13.5 11.9
Heat Pulse (s) - Time to 0.1 W/cm2 35 47 44 42 48 44 42
Total Heat Load (J/cm2) 188 306 243 208 292 232 199
Max Deceleration (g) 19.7 16.7 16.6 16.7 16.2 16.1 16.1
Figure 13 IRVE-3 Atmospheric Low Density Anomaly 
--- PAGE 13 ---
 
IX. Conclusions 
The HIAD project has developed a coordinated approach to maturing the HIAD system to a TRL of 5 
by the end of FY2014. Static and Aerodynamic load testing have been used to develop an inflatable 
structure that satisfies the current load requirement s. Additional elemental and reconfigurable assembly 
load testing in the coming year should allow the fine tuning of the FEA model to the point where it can be 
used to optimize the structural configuration.  Aerothermal performance of the baseline TPS has exceeded 
the original project requirements for a 2 nd generation system.  Refined aero-aerothermal CFD analysis of 
the HEART design mission indicates TPS requirements may be in excess of what was initially deemed 2nd 
generation TPS requirements.  New candidates continue to be evaluated and a TPS capable of handling 
the new aerothermal requirements has been identified.  In the coming year that new candidate layup will 
advance from coupon level testing to large scale assembly in order to prove out construction methods and 
evaluate mechanical durability of the system to th e rigors of manufacturing assembly, packing and 
deployment.  Mission Apps trade studies have identified several mission types where HIAD technology is 
beneficial to the missions.  This year the Mission Apps team will complete a more detailed design in an 
attempt to determine the reasonableness of the outputs of the high level design tools currently used in the 
initial trade studies.  IRVE-4/BTP will complete the integration of the centerb ody components, but there 
is no mission currently approved beyond this. Unfortuna tely, the uncertainties in the Federal Budget 
endanger all future HIAD technology development as th e project must deal with the realities of ever 
shrinking funding.   
  
Figure 15 MAXUS Launch Vehicle Configuration 
--- PAGE 14 ---
References 
1 Calomino, Anthony, “NASA HIAD Generation 1 Flexible Thermal Protection System Development and Flight 
Performance”, 22nd AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
2 Cassell, Alan, “Design and Execution of the Hy personic Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator Large -Article Wind Tunnel 
Experiment”, 22nd AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
3 Swanson, Greg, “Tension Measurements of  Hypersonic Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator Structural Straps under Static 
and Dynamic Loading,” 22nd AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
4 Laura Kushner, “Photogrammetry of a Hypersonic Inf latable Aerodynamic Decelerator in the NFAC”, 22nd AIAA 
Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
5 Kazemba, Cole “Determination of the Deformed Structural  Shape of HIADs from Photogrammetric Wind Tunnel Data,” 
22nd AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
6 Bose, David, “The Hypersonic Inflatable Aerodynamic De celerator (HIAD) Mission Applications Study”, 22nd AIAA 
Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
7 Shidner, Jeremy, “HIAD Mission Applications”, IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT, March 2-9, 2013. 
8 Aaron Olds,  David Bose, “IRVE -3 Post-Flight Reconst ruction”, 22nd AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems 
Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
9 Valerie Gsell, Robert Dillman, “ACS Performance of IRVE -3”, AAS 36th Annual Guidance and Control Conference, 
Breckenridge, CO Feb 13, 2013. 
10 Bruce III, Walter, “Inflatable Reentry Vehicle Experiment 3 (IRVE -3) Comparison of Flexible TPS Flight and Analytical 
Aerothermal Data”, 22nd AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Daytona Beach, FL March 25-28, 2013. 
Bibliography 
1 Joseph A. Del Corso, Walter E. Bruce, III, Kaitlin A. Liles, and Stephen J. Hughes, “Thermal Analysis and Testing of 
Candidate Materials for PAIDAE Inflatable Aeroshell,” 21st AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, Dublin, 
Ireland May 23-26, 2011. 
2 Stephen A. O’Keefe and David M. Bose, “IRVE-II Post-Flight Trajectory Reconstruction”, AIAA-2010-7515  
AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference, Toronto, Ontario, Aug. 2-5, 2010. 
3 Robert A. Dillman, Stephen J. Hughes, Richard J. Bodkin, David M. Bose, Joseph Del Corso, and F. McNeil Cheatwood:  
“Flight Performance of the Inflatable Reentry Vehicle Experiment II”, 7th International Planetary Probe Workshop, Barcelona, 
Spain, June 14–18, 2010. 
4 O’Keefe, S. A., Bose, D. M., “IRVE-II Post-Flight Trajectory Reconstruction,” AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics 
Conference, AIAA Paper 2010-7515, 200914 O’Keefe, S. A., Bose, D. M., “IRVE-II Post-Flight Trajectory Reconstruction,” 
AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference, AIAA Paper 2010-7515, 2009 
5 Axdahl, E., Cruz, J. R., Schoenenberger, M. and Wilhite, A., “Flight Dynamics of an Aeroshell Using an Attached Inflatable 
Aerodynamic Decelerator,” AIAA Paper 2009-2963, 2009 
6 Del Corso, J.A., Bruce, W.E., Liles, K.A., Hughes, S.J., “Thermal Analysis and Testing of Candidate Materials for PAIDAE 
Inflatable Aeroshell”, 20
th AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, May 2009 
7 Stephen J. Hughes, Joanne S. Ware, Joseph A. Del Corso, and Rafael A. Lugo “Deployable Aeroshell Flexible Thermal 
Protection System Testing”, 20th AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Conference, May 2009 
8 Player, Charles, “PAIDAE Thermal Protection System Testing Final Report – FY2008”, PAI-DAE-3.3-012, NASA Langley 
Research Center, 2008 
9 Bruce III, Walter E., “Aeroassist Inflatable Reentry System (AIRS) Thermal Protection System (TPS) Thermal Analysis”, 
STSB-2006-002, February 2006 
10 Michael C. Lindell, Stephen J. Hughes, Megan Dixon, and Cliff E. Willey, “Structural Analysis and Testing of the Inflatable 
Re-entry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE)”, AIAA-2006-1699 
11 Starr, B. R., Bose, D. M., Thornblom, M., and Kilcoyne, D. "Inflatable Reentry Vehicle Experiment Flight Performance 
Simulations," 53rd JANNAF Propulsion Meeting, Monterey, CA, Dec. 5-8, 2005. 
12 F. McNeil Cheatwood, James M. Corliss, Charles J. Player, Cliff E. Willey, and James Stein:  “Inflatable Entry Systems 
Technologies for NASA Exploration’’, AIAA Paper 2005-6811, Space 2005 Conference, Long Beach, CA, August 30 – 
September 1, 2005. 
13 Charles J. Player, Dr. F. McNeil Cheatwood, James Corliss:  “Development of Inflatable Entry Systems Technologies’’, 3rd 
International Planetary Probe Workshop, Anavyssos, Greece, June 27 – July 1, 2005. 
14 R. A. Dillman, F. M. Cheatwood, J. M. Corliss, S. J. Hughes:  “Technology Developments for Atmospheric Entry Systems’’, 
3rd International Planetary Probe Workshop, Anavyssos, Greece, June 27 - July 1, 2005. 
--- PAGE 15 ---
15 Stephen J. Hughes, Robert A. Dillman, Brett R. Starr, Ryan A. Stephan, Michael C. Lindell, Charles J. Player, and F. McNeil 
Cheatwood:  “Inflatable Re-entry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE) Design Overview’’, 18th AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator 
Systems Technology Conference and Seminar, Munich, Germany, May 24-26, 2005. 
16 Claude A. Graves, Carlos H. Westhelle, Christopher Madsen, Richard W. Powell, F. Neil Cheatwood, Charles J. Player, Juan 
R. Cruz, Alicia D. Cianciolo, Glen Brown, Chirold Epp:  “Inflatable Aeroshells as an Alternative Aerodynamic Decelerator,” 
AAS Paper 05-062, 28th Annual AAS Guidance and Control Conference, Breckenridge, CO, February 5-9, 2005 
17 M.C.A.M. van der List, L.D. van Vilet, H.M Sanders, P. van Put, J.W.E.C. Elst:  “Applications for Solid Propellant Cool Gas 
Generator Technology”. 
18 Bradford Engineering, Bradford Datasheet, Solid Propellant Cool Gas Generator – Revision: OCT 2009 
19 Airborne Systems 85-1687 “Proposed Baseline Design Supersonic Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator (SIAD)” 
 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to acknowledge, in addition to the other authors sited in references, the rest of the outstanding team across 
the country who, without their efforts, this technology development would not be possible.  The list included here is long and yet 
even still there are likely to be people inadvertently left off the list.  
LaRC Team 
Lee Abston, Vincent P. Adams, Ruth M. Amundsen, Charles W. Antill, Katherine Barnstorff, Robert O. Betts, Richard J. Bodkin, 
Frank L. Boyer, Arthur T. Bradley, Amy Brewer, Timothy Cannella, Ellen B. Carpenter, Daniel J. Carey, Charles E. Cockrell, 
Michael Edward Coleman, Jim Corliss, David Hart Covington, Larry J. Cowen, Amanda Moore Cutright, Debra Dajon, Kamran 
Daryabeigi, Jesse M. Davis, John A. Dec, Joseph Anthony Del Corso, Kennedy Delgado, Robert A. Dillman, John M. DiNonno, 
Ceseley  Dunbar, Anjie Lin Emmett, Walter C. Engelund, David Fahringer, Crystal J. Fenn, Todd Ferrante, Michael G. Fleck, 
Michael A. Flood, Rosemary C. Froehlich, Mark W. Frye, Shawn T. Gallagher, Wayne D. Geouge, David A. Gilman, Guillermo 
A. Gonzalez, Charlie Greenhalgh, Thomas A. Grepiotis, Marion E. Hales, E. Thomas Hall, Jason Hall, Wade T. Hall, Sean M. 
Hancock, Stephen F. Harvin, David A. Helton, Jeff A. Herath, George C. Hilton, Brian R. Hollis, Stephen J. Horan, Charles E. 
Jenkins, R. Keith Johnson, Leslie J. Johnson, Mark L.M Jones, David G. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Knutson, David R. Komar, Ashley 
M. Korzun, Shawn Krizan, Christopher A. Kuhl, Prasad Kutty, Robert Kyle, Laura A. Leybold, Michael C. Lindell, Justin D. 
Littell, Christopher Micha Little, Daniel Litton, Jeff Massie, Johnny C. Mau, Ali Reza Mazaheri, David Alan Mclain, Nathaniel 
J. Mesick, Nathanael A. Miller, Gene S. Monroe, Aaron L. Morris, Lee Noble, Daniel R. Norfolk, Kevin O'Neal, Patricia Y. 
Oneal, James K. Parkinson, Eric Personne, Carrie Rhoades, Chad E. Rice, Shann Julie Rufer, Jamshid A. Samareh, Brian M. 
Saulman, Bethany A. Schiller, Mark Schoenenberger, Robert C. Scott, Willis J. Scott, Ray Seals, Paul Siemers Scott C. Splinter, 
Justin D. Templeton, John E. Theisinger, Steven A. Tobin, Dominic R. Trombetta, Robin D. Tutterow, John W. Van Norman, 
Nicholas Anthony Vitullo, Carl J. Voglewede, Joseph Paul White, Richard D. Winning, Richard G. Winski, A. J. Wise, Charles 
J.Wittkopp, Timothy Wood 
Airborn Systems Team 
Glen Brown, David Jurewicz, Brian Gilles, Paul Anderson, Mike Quinn, Allen Lowery, Ben Tutt, Christopher Kelley, Leo 
Lichodziejewski,  
Jackson Bond Enterprises 
WFF Team 
Ernest L. Bowden, James K. Diehl, Keith Foster, Valerie Gsell, James R. Hoffman, Eric C. Johnson, David T. Kilcoyne, David J. 
Krause, Giovanni Rosanova, Jay Scott, Walter V. Suplick, Eric P. Taylor, John Valliant, Ricky L. Weaver, Libby West, Timothy 
R. Wilson,  
ARC Team 
Jeffrey D. Brown, Cole D Kazemba, Carl E. Kruger, Bernard Laub, Bill Thomas Quach, Marc D. Rezin,  
NFAC Team 
Patrick W. Goulding, Stephen Juhyung Lee, and all of the NFAC facility operators 
DFRC Team 
Tony Chen, Larry D. Hudson, Matthew R. Moholt, Anthony Piazza  
GRC Team 
Eric H. Baker, Frederick W. Dynys, Frances I. Hurwitz, Maryann Meador, Roy M. Sullivan, Stephanie L. Vivod,  
JSC Team 
Christopher J. Cerimele, Steven Del Papa, Ronald K. Lewis, Stephen W. Miller, Ronald R. Sostaric, Susan J. Stachowiak, Carlie 
H. Zumwalt,  
Boeing LCAT Team 
Greg Bass, Matthew P. Kardell, John R. Simms 
