
=== PAGE 69 ===
3. Methodology
Once the boundary cases are identified, for the rarefied and continuum regimes respectively, the
expression requires careful identification of the parametersa1 and a2. These, in fact, should be
analytically fit to the high-fidelity data available in the transitional flow specifically for the class
of stacked-toroid vehicles. The DSMC data obtained and discussed in [56] is employed in the
next chapter to identify such parameters. For this purpose, the non-linear least square-method
is employed as a regression model to calculate the coefficients that are most suited to a given
set of input dataxDSMC and yDSMC. The nonlinear function lsqcurvefit in MATLAB solves the
problem in Equation 3.70 to find coefficientsa1, a2 with the matricesCx((a1, a2), xDSMC ) being
of the same size asyDSMC for an initial estimate ofa1 and a2.
minx||Cx((a1, a2), xDSMC ) − yDSMC ||2
2 = minx ∑
i
(Cx((a1, a2), xDSMC i − yDSMC i )2 (3.70)
3.5.5. Shading Algorithm
Determining elemental flow exposure, often known as shading, is a typical issue with discrete
element estimation of aerodynamic forces [186]. Because of the rectilinear motion of the flow
streamlines, the panel method assumes that the flow does not wrap around the edge of the
stacked-toroid to impact its back surface. A shaded region is therefore created behind the frontal
region directly in contact with the airstream where no momentum transfer occurs. It follows
that the local pressure in the shadowed region can be assumed to be equivalent to the freestream
pressure p = p∞ and that, therefore, the pressure coefficient is equal to zeroCp = 0 according
to Equation C.32 as depicted in Figure 3.18 for the modified Newtonian method. Equation 3.52
enablestheevaluationofthecorrectinclinationanglegivenapanelandtheincomingflowvelocity
vector. The back-face culling algorithm [187] may then be used to select the flow-facing surfaces
on the i − th panel in Equation 3.71.
Figure 3.18.: Shadow region according to Newtonian flow theory
V∞
|V∞| · ˆni
(
< 0 flow-facing
≥ 0 back-facing (3.71)
The simple shading algorithm described in Equation 3.71, however, is only dependent on the
orientation of each individual panel with respect to the incoming flow. This means that this
44

=== PAGE 70 ===
3. Methodology
method is unable to discern the panels which are shielded from the flow by upstream bodies. In
the case of a stacked-toroid, the front aeroshell may completely or partially cover the payload
which would not contribute to the aerodynamic analysis. For this study, it is crucial to be able
to identify which components are not exposed to the incoming flow, and if done incorrectly, this
might slow down processing [186].
The back-face culling algorithm is therefore supported by an additional method developed for
the ADBSat code2 [163, 164, 174], in which only the set of panels that meet the condition
V∞
|V∞| · ˆni < 0, referred to as "group A", can be shadowed and only those panels that meet the
condition V∞
|V∞| · ˆni ≥ 0, or "group B" can shadow other panels. The region of interest for a
stacked-toroid with zero angle-of-attack is shown in Figure 3.19.
Figure 3.19.: Region of shading analysis for complementary algorithm
The following procedure is thus followed according to the approach described in [163]:
1. The identification of the most downwind panel in set A (Panel Y) and the most upwind
panel in set B (Panel Z) is conducted
2. The set A is reduced to A’ by realising that only the panels downwind of Z can be shadowed.
At the same time, set B is reduced to B’ in which only the panels upwind of Y can be used
to shadow other panels.
3. Each panel in set A’ is checked against B’ to identify the upwind panels. The barycentre of
this subset is assessed for the 2D projection of each sub-set panel. If the barycentre is within
the projection, then it is considered as being shadowed and its aerodynamic contribution
is zero, otherwise, the next panel is evaluated.
Sinpetruetal. [163]remarkthatthealgorithmisnotafoolproofmethodofshadingdetermination
and may be inaccurate for coarse meshes with large flat sides. While this should not be the case
for a stacked-toroid IAD, verification shall be conducted in the next chapter.
2Shadow analysis available at https://github.com/nhcrisp/ADBSat/blob/master/toolbox/calc/shadowAnaly.m
Date Accessed: 10/05/2023
45

=== PAGE 71 ===
3. Methodology
3.5.6. Aerostability
Equation 3.43 can be used to obtain theCM about the MRC, taken to be at the origin of the
constructed surface of revolution. When the position of the CoG is known, the moment coefficient
can also be computed about this point with Equation 3.44. The moment coefficient is of interest
to determine the IAD’s aerodynamic stability. As discussed by Mostaza-Prietro and Roberts
[188] for spacecraft subjected to aerodynamic torques, the derivatives of the pitching moment
coefficient with respect to the angle attack∂Cm
∂α and the derivative of the yawing moment with
respect to the sideslip angle∂Cn
∂βs must be negative as shown in Equation 3.72.
∂Cm
∂α < 0 ∂Cn
∂βs
< 0 (3.72)
Additional aerostability parameters can be calculated, but they rely on knowing the moment
of inertia and angular velocity of the vehicles, which are often unavailable during the early
design stages. Therefore, it is common practice to focus on longitudinal static stability, which
is considered sufficient in such cases. To achieve this, the coefficient of pressure (CoP) must be
defined. The CoP represents the point where the average pressure force acts. In the body-frame
orientation depicted in Figure 3.20, the y-coordinate of the CoP is defined for a continuous body
as a function of the pressure distributionp(y) as in Equation 3.73. This is then approximated
for a discretised geometry made of panels based on each panel’sCP [189].
yCoP =
R
yp (y)dyR
p(y)dy → yCoP = ∑ yiCpi
∑ Cpi
(3.73)
Figure 3.20.: Longitudinal Stability of Stacked-toroid
The longitudinal static stability of the decelerator is attained by ensuring that the CoG is in
front of the CoP, as in Figure 3.20. The stability is increased by further shifting the CoG
towards the nose cone, thus increasing the distance between the CoP and CoG, defined as static
margin SM in Equation 3.74 which is normalised by the decelerator’s height. A larger value
of SM is desirable for aerostability because it ensures that the vehicle consistently returns to a
flow-pointing attitude when subjected to disturbances [165].
SM = (yCoP − yCoG ) /hIAD (3.74)
46

=== PAGE 83 ===
3. Methodology
axial and normal force coefficients are presented in Equation 4.1 and Equation 4.2, respectively,
while the lift and drag coefficients are described by Equation 4.3.
C(A,N), f lexible = C(A,N),Rigid − ∆C(A,N)(q∞) (3.104)
3.7.2. Aerothermodynamics
The experimental study conducted by Hollis and Hollingsworth [53] on a F-TPS applied to a
stacked-toroid decelerator determined the aeroheating effects of the surface deformation on its
aerothermal performance. Specifically, rigid, nonsmooth aeroshell models were used to simulate
and quantify the boundary-layer transition and convective heating levels as a consequence of
the surface deformation and associated scalloping phenomenon. Hollis [53] investigated different
models of the IRVE vehicle in NASA’s Langley Aerothermodynamics Laboratory at Mach num-
bers between 5.8 and 6.1. The experimental results were then compared to flow field predictions
using high-fidelity CFD simulations with a finite-volume 3D solver that accounts for nonequilib-
rium chemistry. The combination of the experimental data with the numerical results enabled
the development of a parametric correlation for the effect of scalloping on heating depending on
the scallop heightksc, maximum inflated radius of the deceleratorrin f lated and laminar boundary
layer momentum thickness Reynolds numberReθ. This latter quantity can be estimated using a
simple explicit relation for a flat plate given by Schlichting [219] in Equation 3.106 as a function
of the streamwise Reynolds numberRex in Equation 3.105.
Rex =
ρ∞V∞rin f lated
µ ∞
(3.105)
Reθ = 0.664
√
Rex (3.106)
Hollis’ scalloped augmented heat flux correlation is given in Equation 3.107 as a function of
the kSC
rin f lated
radius where kSC is needed in metres andrin f lated in feet. The expression is used to
estimate the increase in convective heat transfer due to the transition from laminar to turbulent
conditions. The augmented heat transfer coefficient is given in the form of a film coefficienth f
which may be computed according to Equation 3.108 [53] by assuming that the adiabatic wall
enthalpy is equal to the freestream total enthalpyH0, with a wall temperature of 300 K.
 
h fturb
h flam
!
= 1 + 7.3457
 
kSC
rin f lated
!
+ 0.006 + 0.049294
 
kSC
rin f lated
!0.51841
· Reθ (3.107)
h f = q
H0 − H300K
(3.108)
The increase in convective heat flux due to the deflection of the stacked toroid is therefore
predicted by means of Equation 3.107 to determine the heat distribution across the stacked
toroid’s surface, where the relations described in subsection 3.6.1 can be used to determine the
stagnation heat flux.
58

=== PAGE 84 ===
3. Methodology
3.8. Flexible Thermal Protection System
During the EDL sequence that the stacked-toroid must undergo, the inflated outer shell is bound
to experience large heat fluxes from its surrounding environment in the form of convection and
radiation, which is then transferred to its internal structures and payload via conduction. To
ensure that the vehicle survives the severe environmental conditions encountered, the F-TPS
must be carefully designed. When compared to traditional TPS designs, its flexible counterpart
offers the capability of being packaged into a smaller volume within the rocket fairing and inflated
upon entry.
The requirements for the flexible TPS components are that the layers can withstand the highest
aerodynamic pressure and shear loads with the associated aeroheating effects. In addition, the
flexible structure must be tolerant to the packing and deployment of the system [36]. To meet
the specific engineering functional aspects of each mission, a combination of multiple layers of
materials is specifically selected as shown in the staggered configuration in Figure 3.25. This
concept has been developed by NASA across the various projects mentioned in chapter 2, such
as PAIDAE [97], IRVE [44–46, 114], and LOFTID [121–123]. The three functional layers serve
the following purposes [220]:
• The outer layers must sustain the incident heat flux, surface pressure and aerodynamic
shear force during the EDL phases in the form of convective heating, optical thickness,
emissivity and catalycity of the material. These layers must be structurally robust with
low catalicity and should also present a high emissivity to re-radiate the heat to the sur-
rounding. Moreover, it is essential for the chosen materials to maintain their performance
after handling, shape deformation, compression and packing [30].
• The insulation layers’ main function is that of delaying the thermal pulse experienced in the
entry trajectory. The delay must be sufficiently extended to keep the underlying structure
within the temperature design limits. Although the insulators only experience a small
amount of shearing flow, given that they are located behind the outer fabric, it is desirable
for the insulating material to be robust and fault tolerant in the event of a failure to the
outer layers [30].
• The gas barrier must act as a support for the insulating layers and a surface for fastenings
connecting the TPS to the main inflated structure. More importantly, the gas barrier layers
prevent the hot gases and decomposition products arising as a result of the heat transfer
from damaging the toroidal structures.
An optimal selection of the F-TPS layups shall focus on materials that have low areal weight and
low permeability [30]. At the same time, these should also be sufficiently malleable to maintain
uniformity and homogeneity after being subject to deformation. Other manufacturing features
of the material should also be considered such as the maturity of the manufacturing processes
and the ability to constantly reproduce consistent products for testing [30]. Example candidates
of the material layups investigated in the literature include Nextel and SiC for the outer fabric,
due to their high strength and little shrinkage at high continuous temperatures. Pyrogel, on
the other hand, is often chosen as the insulator because of its flexibility and resistance to high
temperatures. Kapton is instead employed for the gas barrier as it retains its properties at large
temperature differences [30].
59

=== PAGE 85 ===
3. Methodology
Figure 3.25.: Definition of the F-TPS layers [36]
Although the thermal characterisation of different F-TPS layups is beyond the scope of this
work, given that an experimental campaign would be required to define the complex material
response [30, 32, 220], the proposed MDAO framework includes the capabilities to estimate the
thermal performance of a given layup and to optimise its thickness. Based on the experimental
and high-fidelity simulation results presented, Del Corso et al. [30, 32] claims that a 1D analysis
comprising convection, radiation and conduction is sufficiently accurate for the through-thickness
results. Given the nature of the MDAO process, a 1D heat diffusion model is hereby proposed to
estimate the temperature variation across an arbitrary F-TPS layup over the expected trajectory
freestream conditions.
The simplified problem forn F-TPS layers, each of thicknessL, is shown in Figure 3.26, where
the outer fabric layers are exposed to the transient heat fluxq(t) in the form of convectionqc,
conduction qcond and re-radiationqrerad. The inner layers of the fabric, gas barrier and insulator,
on the other hand, are only subject to heat conduction driven by the temperature gradient within
the TPS layers. Conversely, the last layer of the gas barrier is in contact with the structural mass
of the stacked toroid. Following the example set by Del Corso et al. [30, 32], the heat conduction
between the inner layers is treated as a thermal resistance, and heat contact conductance is
applied at the interface between each layer. It is noted that this conductance, caused by the
presence of a non-ideal contact between two surfaces, is the inverse of the thermal conductivity
measured experimentally for any given material [30]. Since the contact conductanceqcontact at
the interface of two materials is dependent on the freestream pressure and temperature, this
may also be expressed as qcontact = f (p∞, T∞). However, the rather limited data on contact
conductance available in the literature for the materials of interest to a F-TPS may dictate the
modelling of qcontact as being constant [221].
The problem of predicting the temperature across a compound structure composed of layers
with different material thermal properties and each with different thicknesses has been widely
addressed in the literature [222]. In particular, the implementation of analytical approaches
appears to be dominant due to the computational advantages [223]. However, not are these only
mostly applied to steady-state flows but they also present large degrees of error in the solution.
60

=== PAGE 96 ===
4. Verification & Validation
4.2. Planar Motion Trajectory: Verification
Planar motion is widely applied to entry trajectories and its validity is already well established.
However, to verify the correct implementation of the planar equations of motion described in sec-
tion 3.4 and their suitability in simulating the entry trajectory of a stacked-toroid, a comparison
between the numerical results and the actual flight trajectory of the IRVE-II vehicle is hereby
conducted. The overview of the mission concept of operations is given in Figure 4.5, showing that
the trajectory data is measured between 80 km, used as the reference entry, and 40 km for ap-
proximately 30 seconds [230]. Given that the atmospheric model described in section 3.3 is only
applicable to the Martian atmosphere, the aerodynamic database and environmental conditions,
namely the entry velocity, density and speed of sound, are extrapolated from the reconstructed
flight trajectory [100] as inputs for the planar equations of motion.
Figure 4.5.: IRVE-II Mission Overview [230]
The comparison of the actual flight trajectory of IRVE-II and the simulation results is shown
in Figure 4.6 for the altitude-Mach number curve, deceleration load against altitude, dynamic
pressure against altitude and, finally, for the downrange profile over the time of flight. All the
results presented show an excellent agreement with the flight data, presentingR2 correlations
larger than 0.98 in all cases. It is noted that the reconstructed trajectory data of IRVE-II was
obtained using the Program to Optimize Simulated Trajectories II [100], accounting for each
trajectory stage. However, of interest to this section is the re-entry phase between 40 km and
80 km of altitude. The reference data adopted in this work for comparison also falls within
the pre-flight simulation Monte Carlo results conducted by O’Keefe et al. [100], confirming the
validity of the data.
71

=== PAGE 97 ===
4. Verification & Validation
3 4 5 6
40
50
60
70
80
(a) Mach Number
50 60 70 80
0
2
4
6 (b) g-load
50 60 70 80
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
(c) Dynamic Pressure
0 10 20 30
0
2
4
6
8
10 (d) Downrange
Figure 4.6.: Comparison of Reconstructed IRVE-II Trajectory with Planar Motion
The mean percentage errors are shown in Table 4.3, where errors between1 − 7 % are obtained
across the plots. The excellent agreement, due to the minimised source of uncertainty in aerody-
namic coefficients and atmospheric parameters given that these have been extrapolated from the
actual flight, confirms the suitability of the planar model to evaluate trajectories in early design
stages.
Although the errors resulting from the assumptions made in the definition of the planar equations
are generally small, it is important to acknowledge their presence. One such assumption is the
absence of lateral wind speeds, which was instead measured in the case of IRVE-II [100, 230].
However, for the purposes of this work, these errors are considered to be negligible. The effect
of wind on the entry trajectory is further discussed in section B.7.
h − M
Figure 4.6(a)
g − h
Figure 4.6(b)
q − h
Figure 4.6(c)
R − t
Figure 4.6(d)
1.978% 7.097% 3.696% 1.074%
Table 4.3.: Average Percentage Error|δ%,avg | of IRVE-II Trajectory Model
72

=== PAGE 98 ===
4. Verification & Validation
4.3. Aerodynamics
4.3.1. Mesh Independence: Verification
Prior to establishing the validity of the aerodynamics method described in section 3.5, it is crucial
to verify that the results obtained with the panel methods for a stacked-toroid are independent of
the vehicle’s spatial discretisation. The IRVE-II design is constructed as shown in Figure 4.1 and
nine meshes are generated with an increasing level of refinement in Table 4.4. The increasing level
of refinement in the meshes is visually displayed in Figure 4.8 to show that while the number
of panels is increased, the topology of the baseline geometry in each mesh is conserved. The
mesh independence hereby verified is also valid for the integration of the panel method with the
aerothermal models later analysed for the heat distribution.
Number of Triangles 1694 4152 5220 5562 10656 11784 26078 54446
Number of Nodes 849 2076 2612 2783 5330 5894 13041 27225
Table 4.4.: Mesh independence study for aerodynamics panel method
Figure 4.7.: Refinement of the number of panels generated for the IRVE design
The modified Newtonian panel code is thus run for the investigated meshes and the drag co-
efficient is measured for the scenario in whichM = 5 and γ = 1.4. The computational time
and normalized drag coefficient are shown in Figure 4.7. It is observed that no change in drag
coefficient is observed beyond 30,000 mesh triangles and that only 1% of variation is measured
after 5,000 triangles. The convergence of the resulting normalised drag coefficient is also associ-
ated with the logarithmic reduction of the average panel area in proportion to the total surface
area of the stacked toroid. A value lower than4 · 10−4 is recommended based on the percentage
change ofCD.The lower surface area should especially be employed in the rounded features of the
geometry, such as the nose cone and the outer torus’ shoulder. The increased mesh refinement
comes at the expense of an increased computational time, though this varies from 0.2 seconds for
73
